---
layout: default
title: SoC 2022 Organization Application
---

This is a draft of git's application to Google's Summer of Code 2022.

# Initial form

## Organization Name

Git

## Is this organization an established Open Source project or organization that releases code under an OSI approved license ? An OSI License is required for program participation.

Yes

## Has your organization participated in Google Summer of Code before? 

Yes

## Please select all years in which your organization participated prior to 2022.

Every year since 2007 except 2013.

## [Agreement](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/terms/org)

Accepted


# Organization Profile

## Website URL for Organization

https://git-scm.com/


## Logo

![Git Logo](/images/Git-Logo-1788C.png)


## Tagline

fast,scalable,distributed revision control system


## Primary Open Source License

GNU General Public License version 2.0 (GPL-2.0)


## When year was your project started?

2005


## Link to your source code location

http://github.com/git/git


## Organization Categories

Programming Languages and Development Tools


## Technology tags

c language, shell script, git


## Topic Tags

version control, dvcs


## Organization Description

Git is the most widely-used revision control system in Open Source. It
is a distributed system with an emphasis on speed, data integrity, and
support for distributed, non-linear workflows.

Many large and successful projects use Git, including the Linux
Kernel, Perl, Eclipse, Gnome, KDE, Qt, Ruby on Rails, Android,
PostgreSQL, Debian, and X.org.

This organization covers projects for
[Git](https://github.com/git/git) itself. Other git-based software or
services are not covered by this organization.


## Contributor Guidance

https://git.github.io/General-Application-Information/


## Communication Methods

Chat: https://git-scm.com/community

Mailing List / Forum: https://git-scm.com/community

General Email: git@vger.kernel.org


# Organization Questionnaire

## Why does your org want to participate in Google Summer of Code?

With the exception of 2013, Git has participated in GSoC every year
since 2007. We have appreciated not only the code contributions (both
new features and internal refactoring to reduce the maintenance
effort), but also the increased project visibility and the addition of
new long-term contributors. We also believe strongly in helping
students become comfortable contributing to open source in general,
even if they do not remain involved with Git itself.


## What would your organization consider to be a successful GSoC program?

Students enjoying contributing improvements, learning and
participating in the community. It would be even better if they
continue to contribute and are willing to mentor other people after
the Summer.


## How will you keep mentors engaged with their students?

We think that the most important part of GSoC is integrating the
students into the normal communication channels used by other project
members. The first step in dealing with disappearing students is to
make sure they are engaging with the community on design and code
issues, and reaching small milestones on the way to the project. Then
if they do disappear, we know quickly and can react, rather than being
surprised at the end.

If they do disappear, we'll obviously contact them and find out
what's going on. But ultimately, non-communication is grounds for a
failing evaluation, regardless of any code produced.

We plan to take fewer projects than we have as mentors. We usually
have two co-mentors per students, so that one mentor being unavailable
would have a limited impact on the project. Most of our projects can
be mentored by any of the mentors, and by keeping student progress
public and reviewed on-list, another mentor (or the community at
large) can pick up the slack if needed.


## How will you help your students stay on schedule to complete their projects?

There are several ways to do this, and they have been successful in
the past:

* Prepare students to submit patches before they started. We use a
  microproject system prior to the student application where students
  must submit at least a patch, and respond to reviews. This means
  that on day 1 of their project, students already know how long
  review cycles are, and how important it is to work with the
  mailing-list.

* Split the work into small patch series. We don't expect regular
  developers to go silent for 3 months and then dump 10,000 lines of
  code on us to review, and we don't want students to do that to us
  either. Even if the first patch series are only preparatory steps
  that do not bring a real added value to Git, it is important to get
  them merged as early as possible. Even if the project is not
  "completed", useful pieces of code are validated all along the
  project.


## How will you get your students involved in your community during GSoC?

Students will be required to join the main development mailing list
and post their patches for discussion (in addition to posting their
work as a Git repository on a publicly available server). All current
contributors already do this, so students will be able to see
experienced hands performing the same tasks and learn by example. We
also feel that the list-based discussions will help the student to
become and stay a member of the community.

Mentors will also exchange direct email with students on at least a
weekly basis. Students will be required to provide weekly progress
reports back to their mentors, so that mentors are aware of the
current difficulties. Progress reports give the mentors a chance to
provide suggestions for problem resolution back to the student.

Frequent email and IRC interaction with mentors and other developers
will be strongly encouraged by suggesting students post their questions
and ideas to the mailing list, and to discuss them on #git.


## Anything else we should know (optional)?

We sometimes write about the GSoC in our Git Rev News newsletter
(https://git.github.io/rev_news/archive/).


## Is your organization part of any government?

No


# Program Application

## Ideas List URL

<https://git.github.io/SoC-2022-Ideas/>


## Mentors

```
How many Mentors does your Organization have available to participate in this program?
```

5


### How many students did your org accept for 2021?

2


### How many of your org's 2021 students are active today?

1

