---
title: Git Rev News Edition 126 (August 31st, 2025)
layout: default
date: 2025-08-31 12:06:51 +0100
author: chriscool
categories: [news]
navbar: false
---

## Git Rev News: Edition 126 (August 31st, 2025)

Welcome to the 126th edition of [Git Rev News](https://git.github.io/rev_news/rev_news/),
a digest of all things Git. For our goals, the archives, the way we work, and how to contribute or to
subscribe, see [the Git Rev News page](https://git.github.io/rev_news/rev_news/) on [git.github.io](http://git.github.io).

This edition covers what happened during the months of July and August 2025.

## Discussions

<!---
### General
-->

<!---
### Reviews
-->


### Support

* [[BUG] `git pull` ignores `pull.autostash=true` configuration when used with `--git-dir` and `--work-tree` flags on a bare repository](https://lore.kernel.org/git/010001980c1ee007-2797fc86-fdf3-46e9-bec9-f8da2c9ebb8d-000000@email.amazonses.com/)

  Bryan Lee posted a bug report about the `pull.autostash`
  configuration variable being ignored in a repository used to manage
  his dotfiles.

  He expected his unstaged changes to be automatically stashed before
  a pull when that configuration variable is set to `true`. Instead,
  the command failed with an error message telling him to "Please
  commit or stash them". So he thought Git ignored the autostash
  configuration completely due to the setup, which consisted of a bare
  repository and a separate work tree accessed through the following
  alias:

  `$ alias dot='git --git-dir=$HOME/.dotfiles/ --work-tree=$HOME'`

  Lidong Yan replied to Bryan admitting that he wasn't sure why the
  autostash feature would be ignored when using the `--git-dir` and
  `--work-tree` flags. He suggested setting `rebase.autostash` instead
  of `pull.autostash` to `true` though.

  Bryan Lee thanked Lidong saying that `pull.autostash` was not a Git
  configuration option and that `rebase.autostash` did work for
  rebase operations. But he raised the issue that Git silently accepts
  invalid configuration keys without any warning, which can cause
  users to waste a lot of time debugging.

  Lidong replied with a suggestion to add a `git config verify`
  subcommand. But Junio Hamano, the Git maintainer, chimed in
  expressing doubts about such a command, as Git cannot distinguish
  between a typo of a known variable and a legitimate custom variable
  that a user or a third-party tool might be using. Lidong elaborated
  that such a command could work by having Git maintain an internal
  registry of all valid keys, which could also be extended by users
  and tools for their own custom configurations.

  Johannes Sixt suggested that instead of building a complex
  verification system, it would be easier to fix the origin of the
  misconception that `pull.autostash` was the correct configuration.

  Junio replied to Johannes that having `git pull` pay attention to
  `rebase.autostash` was at least a documentation failure, if not a
  bug. He argued that users have different expectations for a
  relatively safe local rebase compared to a pull from a remote, which
  could be riskier. Also it didn't make sense for `git pull` to
  respect `rebase.autostash` but not `merge.autostash`.

  Ben Knoble then chimed in with a counter-argument to Junio. He
  reasoned that since a `git pull` that rebases is conceptually a
  fetch followed by a rebase, it would be "far more inconsistent" if
  it didn't honor the rebase configuration. Breaking that expectation
  would be unnatural for users taught to think of pull in that
  way. Following this logic, he also supported the idea that a merging
  pull should respect `merge.autostash`.

  Then Junio wondered if introducing a new, dedicated `pull.autostash`
  variable would be a good idea. But soon Lidong came up with
  [a patch](https://lore.kernel.org/git/20250717030732.75106-1-yldhome2d2@gmail.com/)
  to actually add this configuration variable.

  Eric Sunshine reviewed the patch and left a number of suggestions to
  improve it in many ways. After some discussions with Lidong and
  Junio, Lidong posted
  [a version 2 of the patch](https://lore.kernel.org/git/20250720124334.12045-1-yldhome2d2@gmail.com/).

  This new version implemented a number of improvements based on the
  discussion. Some tests were added. The logic was updated to fall
  back to either `rebase.autostash` or `merge.autostash` depending on
  whether the pull performed a rebase or a merge. The order of
  precedence was also clarified: `pull.autostash` now overrides the
  more general `rebase.autostash` and `merge.autostash`
  settings. Finally, the documentation was updated with more precise
  explanations.

  This feature was released recently as part of Git v2.51.0.

## Developer Spotlight: Seyi Kuforiji

_Editor’s note: This edition features a retrospective interview with a
contributor who contributed to Git through a mentoring program. We hope
the reflections shared by the Outreachy contributor will provide an
insightful perspective that benefits the community. As always, we
welcome your thoughts and feedback!_

* **Who are you and what do you do?**

  My name is Seyi Kuforiji, and I’m an Outreachy alum who worked on
  [modernizing Git’s unit testing platform](https://seyi-kuforiji-902b48.gitlab.io/posts/week-1-Introduce-yourself)
  by converting its homegrown unit test framework to use [Clar](https://github.com/clar-test/clar).
  I studied geography at the University of Lagos, but my curiosity
  and passion for computers and software drove me to start learning
  Python and Git immediately after graduating.

  Since then, I’ve enjoyed exploring different areas of IT, from
  software engineering to data science and DevOps, because I genuinely
  love learning and experimenting with new tools. I also earned a
  certification in Health Data Science and Precision Medicine from
  Stanford University, which reflects my commitment to leveraging
  technology to improve lives. Participating in Outreachy through Git
  demonstrated to me the impact of open-source collaboration, and it has
  strengthened my passion for developing solutions that give back to the
  community.

  Outside of work, I’m usually diving into something new. Right now, the
  [Linux graphics stack](https://lwn.net/Articles/955376/) has caught my
  attention, but when I decide to give my brain a break from tech, I play
  chess or watch sports.

* **How did you initially become interested in contributing to Git,
  and what motivated you to choose it as your Outreachy project?**

  Git was one of the first tools I ever learned years ago. At first, I
  didn’t really understand it; I only knew a few commands like
  `git clone`, `git add .`, and `git commit -m "<message>"`, and I was
  living life with just those. I remember during my 12-month software
  engineering bootcamp, I helped some of my colleagues with Git because
  I had this so-called “prior knowledge”, and for a while, I was treated
  like a genius, at least until they caught up!

  So when I saw Git on the list of Outreachy projects, I knew right away
  that this was where I needed to be: to deepen my understanding of the
  tool and maybe level up from “genius” to something closer to expert
  wizardry. These days, some say I’m a wizard, others say I’m a maestro,
  but I’m just a humble guy who enjoys learning and sharing knowledge.

* **How do you feel your contribution has impacted the Git community
  or the broader open source ecosystem?**

  My contribution to Git, which was modernizing its homegrown unit
  testing framework to use Clar, has helped improve Git’s testing
  capabilities by making the tests more maintainable, easier to
  understand, and easier to extend to cover more edge cases in the
  future. Clar brings additional benefits such as clearer test
  reporting, a more structured way to organize tests, and improved
  readability, which makes the testing process more approachable for new
  contributors. While this was primarily an internal-facing improvement,
  I believe it plays an important role in maintaining the reliability of
  Git’s functions and operations. A stronger testing framework makes it
  easier for both new and experienced contributors to work with the
  codebase confidently, which in turn strengthens Git for the millions
  of people who rely on it every day.

* **Is there any aspect of Git that you now see differently after
  having contributed to it?**

  Like I said earlier, I started out only knowing a handful of Git
  commands to do basic operations. My biggest takeaway since
  contributing to Git has been discovering the full power of its
  interactive rebase. I always saw rebase on cheat sheets but never
  really experienced its capabilities until I worked more deeply with
  Git. The best way I can describe it is that it feels like a time
  machine: I make changes and commits, Git captures those states in
  time, and with interactive rebase, I can go back, rewrite history, and
  improve it as if it were the first time.

  I still find it so cool that in my text editor, I can see files I had
  already deleted in later commits come back to life during a rebase. It
  completely changed how I view Git, not just as a version control
  system, but as a powerful storytelling tool for code.

* **How do you balance your contributions with other responsibilities
  like work or school?**

  I usually create a schedule with a clear timeframe dedicated to
  working on the Git project. For example, during Outreachy, I set aside
  specific blocks of time each day, treating it almost like a regular
  job. This helped me stay consistent, avoid distractions, and make
  steady progress.

  I’ve learned that balancing open-source contributions with other
  responsibilities is all about structure and prioritization. By
  planning my week ahead, I can make sure that my work, personal life,
  and contributions don’t clash. Of course, I also try to stay flexible;
  some weeks are more demanding than others, but having a framework
  keeps me grounded and ensures I can keep giving my best to Git.

* **Can you share how Outreachy helped enhance your technical and
  non-technical skills (like communication, project management, etc.)?**

  My C and low-level engineering skills have improved immensely through
  this experience. I now feel much more confident working in a large and
  complex codebase, and I’ve built the mindset to take on hard problems
  without shying away. This confidence is what’s encouraging me to dive
  deeper into the Linux kernel, where I’ve been learning and
  experimenting with the graphics stack and GPU drivers. My knowledge of
  Git itself has also grown significantly, particularly with the
  interactive rebase functionality, which has completely changed how I
  think about version control and history management.

  On the non-technical side, I grew a lot in communication and project
  management. I learned how to break down tasks into smaller, achievable
  goals, track progress against deadlines, and ask for help effectively
  when I was stuck. Collaborating with mentors and the wider Git
  community also taught me the importance of giving clear updates in
  blog posts and writing thoughtful commit messages.

  Overall, the experience didn’t just make me a better programmer; it
  made me more disciplined, collaborative, and confident in working on
  real-world projects.

* **What was your biggest takeaway or learning from Outreachy that
  you now apply regularly in your work?**

  My biggest takeaway from Outreachy is the balance between
  understanding deeply and taking action. My mentor encouraged me to not
  just know how things work but also to dig into why they work. At the
  same time, I learned that it’s easy to get stuck in the learning
  phase, waiting until you feel "ready." During my first few weeks, I
  hesitated too much. What really helped me was realizing that you don’t
  need to know everything before you start; you just need enough to
  begin, and the rest comes as you build and iterate. That shift has
  stayed with me and is something I now apply regularly in my life.

* **What was the biggest challenge you faced during your contributions
  to Git, and how did you overcome it?**

  One of the biggest challenges I faced was understanding the Git
  codebase. Git is a very large and complex project with many
  interconnected parts, and even though my task was limited to the unit
  testing section, I also needed to understand the underlying
  functionality being tested. At first, it felt daunting, but I overcame
  this by burning the midnight candle, digging deeper, and committing
  myself to continuous learning. Bit by bit, things started to make
  sense. What really helped was breaking down the complexity into
  smaller pieces and focusing on one area at a time, while also asking
  lots of questions and referring back to documentation.

* **Have you thought about mentoring new GSoC / Outreachy students?**

  Yes, I hope to mentor future Outreachy interns if the opportunity arises.

* **If you could get a team of expert developers to work full time on
  something in Git for a full year, what would it be?**

  A first-class graphical interface officially maintained by the Git
  project, for those who prefer using an app instead of the command
  line.

* **What upcoming features or changes in Git are you particularly
  excited about?**

  I’ve been reading recent discussions on the Git mailing list about how
  Git might evolve in the age of AI, particularly around enabling
  integrations with AI agents. The idea of extending Git’s capabilities
  so that AI tools can better understand, interact with, and even
  automate certain workflows is quite exciting. For example, AI-assisted
  code reviews, intelligent merge conflict resolution, or automated
  repository maintenance could become more seamless if Git had
  standardized ways for agents to plug into its internals.

* **What is your favorite Git-related tool/library, outside of Git
  itself?**

  GitHub and GitLab.

* **What is your toolbox for interacting with the mailing list and for
  development of Git?**

  I mostly work from the command line. For sending contributions, I use
  `git format-patch` and `git send-email`, since I’m more comfortable with
  CLI tools.

* **How do you envision your own involvement with Git or other open
  source projects in the future?**

  I intend to remain active in the Git community for many years by
  making steady contributions. At the moment, I’m still learning and
  exploring the project to identify areas where I can improve and add
  value. Over time, I hope to grow into a consistent contributor and
  take on more responsibility within the project.

* What is your advice for people who want to start Git development?
  Where and how should they start?

  For anyone starting Git development, I’d recommend a few key
  resources. The "[Hacking Git](https://git.github.io/Hacking-Git/)”
  guide is definitely a go-to resource for understanding how the
  project is structured and how to navigate the codebase.
  The [MyFirstContribution](https://git-scm.com/docs/MyFirstContribution)
  page is also very helpful for learning how to get started with making
  changes. Beyond that, the general Git documentation is valuable for
  building a solid foundation. Starting small, asking questions, and
  getting familiar with these resources can make the process much
  smoother.

* **Would you recommend other students or contributors to participate in
  the GSoC, Outreachy or other mentoring programs, working on Git?
  Why? Do you have advice for them?**

  100% yes. Programs like GSoC and Outreachy give you the unique
  opportunity to learn directly from some of the smartest and most
  experienced contributors in the Git community. Having a mentor to
  guide you through real contributions accelerates your learning, helps
  you build confidence and good practices early on. I’d absolutely
  recommend it. My advice would be: come with curiosity, patience, and
  the willingness to learn. Don’t worry if you don’t understand
  everything at first. Ask questions, read the documentation, and engage
  with the community. The mentorship and the experience you gain are
  invaluable.


## Other News

__Various__

+ [What’s new in Git 2.51.0?](https://about.gitlab.com/blog/what-s-new-in-git-2-51-0/)
  by Karthik Nayak on GitLab Blog.  It describes performance optimizations
  for `git push` and `git fetch` (most significant when using the "reftable"
  backend for references), further plans for Git 3.0 (which can be
  found in the [BreakingChanges document](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/git/-/blob/master/Documentation/BreakingChanges.adoc)), semi-removal of `git whatchanged`
  (still available with `--i-still-use-this` flag), and marking
  `git switch` and `git restore` as no longer experimental,
  adding a new `--start-after` flag for `git for-each-ref` (that can be
  combined with the `--count` flag to support pagination), etc.
+ [Highlights from Git 2.51](https://github.blog/open-source/git/highlights-from-git-2-51/)
  by Taylor Blau on GitHub Blog.  It describes cruft-free multi-pack indexes
  (which currently require setting a new `repack.MIDXMustContainCruft` config option),
  smaller packs with a "path walk" method of collecting objects when repacking
  (which you can try out with the new `--path-walk` command-line option),
  a variant of the internal stash representation that can be used for stash interchange
  (with new `export` and `import` commands for `git stash`), etc.
+ [Xet is now the default storage option for new users and organizations](https://huggingface.co/changelog/xet-default-for-new-users)
  at [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/), switching from [Git LFS](https://git-lfs.com/).
  This includes moving existing repositories from LFS to Xet.
  To get the most out of Xet storage [read the usage instructions in the Hub docs](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/storage-backends#using-xet-storage).
  Note that Xet remains backward compatible with legacy clients optimized for Git LFS.
    + [XetHub](https://xethub.com/) was first mentioned in passing in
      [Git Rev News #95](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2023/01/31/edition-95/),
      and its [benchmark by XetHub against S3, DVC, and Git LFS](https://about.xethub.com/blog/benchmarking-the-modern-development-experience)
      was mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #113](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2024/07/31/edition-113/).
    + Compare with [DagsHub launching Direct Data Access in 2022](https://dagshub.com/blog/launching-data-streaming-and-upload/).
      [DagsHub](https://dagshub.com/) was first mentioned in
      [Git Rev News Edition #72](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2021/02/27/edition-72/),
      then in [#85](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2022/03/31/edition-85/),
      [#96](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2023/02/28/edition-96/),
      [#107](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2024/01/31/edition-107/), and
      [#113](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2024/07/31/edition-113/).


__Light reading__

+ [The future of large files in Git is Git](https://tylercipriani.com/blog/2025/08/15/git-lfs/)
  by Tyler Cipriani on his blog.  It describes how one can use
  partial clone today (and large object promisors in the future,
  which are work in progress) instead of using [Git LFS](https://git-lfs.com/)
  or similar solutions like [git-annex](https://git-annex.branchable.com/)
  (or no longer actively developed solutions like git-media and git-fat)
  or [DVC](https://dvc.org/) (Data Version Control).
+ [Code Review Can Be Better](https://tigerbeetle.com/blog/2025-08-04-code-review-can-be-better/)
  (than GitHub's default code review process)
  by matklad (Alex Kladov) on the TigerBeetle blog.<br>
  Mentions their [`git-review`](https://github.com/tigerbeetle/tigerbeetle/pull/2732)
  work-in-progress tool, and also the
    + [Fossil](https://fossil-scm.org/) version control system with built-in project management
      (first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #11](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2016/01/13/edition-11/)), the
    + [NoteDb](https://gerrit-review.googlesource.com/Documentation/note-db.html) backend
      for [Gerrit](https://www.gerritcodereview.com/) - which allows storing review state in Git,
      (NoteDb was first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #40](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2018/06/20/edition-40/)), the
    + [git-bug](https://github.com/git-bug/git-bug) tool that uses Git to store information about issues / bugs
      (first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #43](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2018/09/19/edition-43/)), the
    + [git-appraise](https://github.com/google/git-appraise) tool that uses Git to store information about reviews
      (first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #11](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2016/01/13/edition-11/)), the
    + [prr](https://doc.dxuuu.xyz/prr/index.html) ('pull request review') tool that brings mailing list style code reviews to GitHub PRs
      (mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #90](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2022/08/31/edition-90/)), the
    + [git-pr](https://pr.pico.sh/) project that leverages Git native features to replace the entire pull request workflow,
      (mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #113](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2024/07/31/edition-113/)), and the
    + [How Jane Street Does Code Review](https://www.janestreet.com/tech-talks/janestreet-code-review/)
      article by Ian Henry on Jane Street Tech Talks site.
+ [Jujutsu + Radicle = ❤️](https://radicle.xyz/2025/08/14/jujutsu-with-radicle)
  by fintohaps on Radicle Blog, describing how the author uses Jujutsu in tandem with Radicle.
    + [Jujutsu (`jj`)](https://jj-vcs.github.io/jj/) is a Git-compatible version control system
      written in Rust, and was first mentioned in
      [Git Rev News Edition #85](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2022/03/31/edition-85/).
    + [Radicle](https://radicle.xyz/), a peer-to-peer, local-first code collaboration stack built on Git,
      was first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #49](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2019/03/20/edition-49/).
+ [introducing spindle](https://blog.tangled.sh/ci) by Anirudh & Akshay on Tangled blog;
  spindle is Tangled’s new CI runner built atop Nix and the AT Protocol.
    + [Tangled.sh](https://blog.tangled.sh/intro) is a new social-enabled Git collaboration platform
      built on top of the AT Protocol (which is behind [BlueSky](https://bsky.app/)
      microblogging federated social media service).
      First mentioned in [the previous edition of Git Rev News](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2025/07/31/edition-125/).
    + Compare the [Using Radicle CI for Development](https://radicle.xyz/2025/07/23/using-radicle-ci-for-development)
      article by Lars Wirzenius, also mentioned in [Git Rev News #125](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2025/07/31/edition-125/).
      [Radicle](https://radicle.xyz/) is another distributed Git hosting system,
      first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #49](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2019/03/20/edition-49/).
+ [How we used Radicle with GitHub Actions](https://radicle.xyz/2025/05/30/radicle-with-github-actions):
  Quick guide to trying Radicle without dropping GitHub or whatever CI you’re using.
  Published by rudolfs (Rūdolfs Ošiņš) on Radicle Blog.
+ [Archive Legacy GitHub Repos with Subtree](https://dev.to/tonymet/archive-legacy-github-repos-with-subtree-1dj3)
  by Tony Metzidis on DEV\.to, about how to use `git subtree` to consolidate
  hundreds of legacy experimental repos into an archive,
  preserving all of the commit history.
+ [I'll think twice before using Github Actions again](https://ninkovic.dev/blog/2025/think-twice-before-using-github-actions)
  by Nemanja Ninković on their blog.
+ [Git without a forge](https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/quasiblog/git-no-forge/)
  by Simon Tatham on his quasiblog, describing how to interact with a bare Git repo,
  and explaining why he personally does not use any of the Git forges.
+ [How I Cleaned Up My Git History Like a Boss (a.k.a. Fixing Wrong Author Emails)](https://dev.to/emrahg/how-i-cleaned-up-my-git-history-like-a-boss-aka-fixing-wrong-author-emails-19lb)
  by Emrah G. on DEV\.to.  The solution uses the (deprecated) `git filter-branch` tool;
  the recommended replacement is [`git filter-repo`](https://github.com/newren/git-filter-repo).
  Also, you can correct the _visible_ e-mail with the [`.mailmap`](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitmailmap) file
  (changing what Git shows, without having to rewrite history).
+ [Revolutionizing Git Workflows: The MCP Git Commit Generator](https://www.bampouris.eu/blog/mcp-git-commit-generator/)
  by Theoklitos Bampouris on his blog (and also [on DEV\.to](https://dev.to/theoklitosbam7/revolutionizing-git-workflows-the-mcp-git-commit-generator-530m)),
  about using Agentic AI and an LLM chatbot,
  leveraging the [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction).
  The generated commit message will follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) conventions.<br>
  Note: please read the proposed commit message before accepting it,
  especially for more complex changes.  While AI agents can take information
  from changes and from an issue tracker, they cannot write whys of the change;
  they cannot access your thoughts.
    + [Git Rev News Edition #97](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2023/03/31/edition-97/)
      lists a few other tools that use the GPT-3 / ChatGPT Large Language Model (LLM)
      to help write commit messages.
+ [Better git status](https://purpleidea.com/blog/2025/08/04/better-git-status/)
  by James (@purpleidea) on his blog.  He uses `git alias` which examines
  the terminal width, and then `git status --column=nodense` if the terminal is wide enough.
+ [Some Pretty Cool Git Tools To Save Your Sanity](https://fev.al/posts/git-tools/)
  by Charles Féval on his blog.
  Mentions `git revise` for splitting pull requests (PRs),
  and custom `git backup`, `git reparent`, `git split`, `git move-branch`, and `git bookmark` commands.
+ [Using Git worktrees for development](https://blog.kulman.sk/git-worktree/)
  by Igor Kulman on his blog.
+ [Curing A Case Of Git-UX](https://oppi.li/posts/curing_a_case_of_git-UX/)
  by Akshay on their blog; describes how one can improve git worktree UX
  with the help of [fzf](https://github.com/junegunn/fzf)
  (or [skim](https://github.com/lotabout/skim) or [fzy](https://github.com/jhawthorn/fzy)),
  and shell functions.
    + See also [Improving shell workflows with fzf](https://seb.jambor.dev/posts/improving-shell-workflows-with-fzf/),
      mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #74](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2021/04/30/edition-74/).
+ [Making my GitHub heatmap widget](https://leanrada.com/notes/github-heatmap-widget/) by
  Lean Rada on their blog.  The created tool partially scrapes and reformats HTML input,
  but is constructed in such way that it could consume JSON from GitHub API instead.
+ [TryHackMe - Git Happens](https://jacen.moe/blog/20250805-tryhackme-git-happens/)
  by Jacen Sekai on his blog, about [Git Happens](https://tryhackme.com/room/githappens):
  an easy-ranked box on [TryHackMe](https://tryhackme.com/), website for
  hands-on cyber security training through real-world scenarios.
+ [The Ingredients of a Productive Monorepo](https://blog.swgillespie.me/posts/monorepo-ingredients/)
  by Sean Gillespie on his blog.
    + You can find a definition of "monorepo" and a list of various tools on the [Monorepo.tools](https://monorepo.tools/) site,
       which was first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #84](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2022/02/28/edition-84/).
+ [Git Branching Explained: Base, Topic, and Parent Branches](https://www.git-tower.com/blog/base-topic-parent-branches)
  by Bruno Brito on Tower Blog.
+ [Git and jujutsu: in miniature](https://lottia.net/notes/0013-git-jujutsu-miniature.html)
  by Charlotte (lottia) on her blog (2024).
+ [Git Interactive Rebase TODO Order is Wrong](https://salferrarello.com/git-interactive-rebase-order-is-wrong/)
  by Sal Ferrarello on his blog (2019), stating a personal preference for stack-like order,
  with latest commits appearing on the top.<br>
  The author even wrote a Vim plugin,
  [Interactive Rebase Reverse Vim](https://github.com/salcode/vim-interactive-rebase-reverse),
  to reverse the order of the commits in an interactive `git rebase`.
+ [Every line of code is always documented](https://mislav.net/2014/02/hidden-documentation/)
  by Mislav Marohnić on his blog (2014).  The article describes how to
  extract information about a code snippet from project history using `git blame`,
  'pickaxe' search with `git log -S`, and a
  [git-churn](https://github.com/garybernhardt/dotfiles/blob/f0c0ff92209e5aed4fa3ef6faf056eb9944a8f12/bin/git-churn) script,
  and how to stay on the right side of history
  (among others, to be able to use this technique effectively).


<!---
__Easy watching__
-->

__Git tools and sites__

+ [WRKFLW](https://github.com/bahdotsh/wrkflw) is a command-line tool
  for validating and executing GitHub Actions workflows locally,
  without requiring a full GitHub environment.
  It helps developers test their workflows directly on their machines
  before pushing changes to GitHub.
  Written in Rust, under MIT license.
    + Compare with the [Act](https://github.com/nektos/act) command line tool
      to run your GitHub Actions locally, using the Docker Engine API.
      Written in Go, under MIT license.
      Mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #113](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2024/07/31/edition-113/).
+ [Setup DVC Action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/setup-dvc-data-version-control)
  by Iterative is a JavaScript action that can be used as a step in GitHub Actions.<br>
  [DVC](https://dvc.org) (Data Version Control) was first mentioned
  in [Git Rev News Edition #42](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2018/08/22/edition-42/)
  and many times since (most recently in [Edition #116](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2024/10/31/edition-116/)).
+ [Lappverk](https://codeberg.org/natkr/lappverk/) is a tool for modifying other people's software.
  It works by keeping a series of `.patch` files as its source of truth
  (like [quilt](https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/quilt)),
  but using temporary Git repositories as an interface to modify the patches,
  rather than implementing its own version control system from scratch.
  Written in Rust, under Apache 2.0 License.
  Started out as Patchable internal tool.<br>
  You might also be interested in reading the announcement blog post:
  [Modifying Other People's Software](https://natkr.com/2025-08-14-modifying-other-peoples-software/)
  by Natalie Klestrup Röijezon (natkr) on natkr's ramblings.
    + Compare [patchwork](http://jk.ozlabs.org/projects/patchwork/) - a web-based patch tracking system
      designed to facilitate contribution and management of contributions to an open-source project,
      first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #20](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2016/10/19/edition-20/).
    + Compare [Stacked Git (StGit)](https://stacked-git.github.io/),
      an application for managing Git commits as a stack of patches,
      first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #17](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2016/07/20/edition-17/).
    + Compare [B4 Tools](https://github.com/mricon/b4), a helper utility
      to work with patches made available via a [public-inbox](https://public-inbox.org/README.html) archive like [lore.kernel.org](https://lore.kernel.org/).
      This tool is written to make it easier to participate in patch-based workflows,
      like those used in the Linux kernel development.
      First mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #61](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2020/03/25/edition-61/).
+ [patch-hub](https://github.com/kworkflow/patch-hub/tree/unstable) is a TUI tool
  that streamlines the interaction of Linux developers
  with patches archived on [lore.kernel.org](https://lore.kernel.org/).
  Written in Rust, under GPL 2.0 license.<br>
  It is a spin-off of [kw](https://github.com/kworkflow/kworkflow),
  a tool for helping Linux kernel developers in everyday tasks
  (which is written in shell, and is under GPL 2.0 license).
+ [GitGenius](https://selvaneyas.github.io/gitgenius) is a smart and simple CLI tool
  that explains Git errors in plain English and helps you fix them quickly.
  Written in Python, under MIT license.
    + See also [thefuck](https://github.com/nvbn/thefuck), a command line application
      which corrects your previous console command (for example Git command)
      if you made an error (like typos in command name), and it _didn't_ do what you wanted;
      the tool was first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #101](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2023/07/31/edition-101/).
    + Compare the [Oh Shit, Git!?!](http://ohshitgit.com/) / [Dangit, Git!?!](https://dangitgit.com/)
      website by Katie Sylor-Miller,
      first mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #19](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2016/09/14/edition-19/).
+ [GIT.WTF!?!](https://git.wtf/) is a website with articles in which you can
  find solutions to your Git problems,
  along with tips & tricks to improve your Git workflows.
+ [GITHUB2FORGEJO](https://github.com/PatNei/GITHUB2FORGEJO)
  is a Bash script for migrating all repositories from a GitHub user account
  to a specified Forgejo instance. It supports mirroring or one-time cloning
  and includes a cleanup feature for removing repositories on Forgejo
  that no longer exist on GitHub.
  Under GPL 3.0 license.<br>
  Based on [GitHub2Forgejo](https://github.com/RGBCube/GitHub2Forgejo)
  Nushell script, also under GPL 3.0 license.
    + [Forgejo](https://forgejo.org/) is a self-hosted lightweight software forge,
      which started as a “soft” fork of Gitea (itself a fork of Gogs),
      and was first mentioned in passing in [Git Rev News Edition #103](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2023/09/30/edition-103/).
+ [git-revise](https://git-revise.readthedocs.io/) is a Git subcommand and Python library
  for efficiently updating, splitting, and rearranging commits.
  Under MIT License.<br>
  The [Introducing git-revise](https://mystor.github.io/git-revise.html)
  blog post was mentioned in [Git Rev News Edition #54](https://git.github.io/rev_news/2019/08/21/edition-54/).
+ [git-tools](https://github.com/cfe84/git-tools) is a set of additional Git commands
  to "help you make crazy stuff in a very unsafe way".
  Includes `git backup`, `git move-branch`, `git reparent` (similar to `git rebase --onto`),
  `git split`, `git bookmark`, `git newbranch`, and `git get`.
  Written in Go, under GPL 2.0 license.
+ [git-fetch-file](https://github.com/andrewmcwattersandco/git-fetch-file) is a utility
  for importing specific files from other Git repositories into your own project,
  while keeping a manifest (`.git-remote-files`) that remembers where they came from
  and what commit they belong to.
  Written in Python, under GPL 2.0 license.
+ [git-word-blame](https://framagit.org/mdamien/git-word-blame)
  is a tool that shows word-by-word authors of a file, creating TSV and HTML files.
  Written in Python, under GPL 3.0 license.
  The README includes links to a few alternative tools in the "See also" section.
+ [`gguser`](https://github.com/withshubh/gguser) is a CLI tool
  to easily switch between different Git user profiles.
  It simplifies managing multiple GitHub or GitLab accounts
  by allowing users to switch between profiles effortlessly.
  Written in JavaScript for Node.js (npm), under Apache 2.0 License.
+ [GitLabForm](https://gitlabform.github.io/gitlabform/) is a specialized configuration-as-code tool
  for GitLab's application settings, groups, projects, and more,
  using hierarchical configuration written in YAML.
  Written in Python, under MIT license.<br>
  See the [GitlabForm for Gitlab repository automation](https://www.mikestreety.co.uk/blog/gitlabform-for-gitlab-repository-automation/)
  blog post by Mike Street on his blog.
+ [`gmap`](https://github.com/seeyebe/gmap) is a fast command-line tool
  (with terminal interface) to explore Git activity - heatmaps, churn, authorship, and more.
  It helps you understand your Git repository at a glance - not just what changed,
  but when, how much, and by whom.
  Written in Rust, under MIT license.
+ [Ayllu](https://ayllu-forge.org/) is a code forge optimized for single instance deployments.
  It is still a work in progress.  Written in Rust, under AGPL license.
+ [DiffMem](https://github.com/Growth-Kinetics/DiffMem) is a lightweight,
  Git-based memory backend designed for AI agents and conversational systems.
  It uses Markdown files for human-readable storage,
  Git for tracking temporal evolution through differentials,
  and an in-memory BM25 index for fast, explainable retrieval.
  This project is a proof-of-concept (PoC).
  Written in Python, no license (!).


## Releases

+ Git [2.51.0](https://lore.kernel.org/git/xmqqikikk1hr.fsf@gitster.g/),
[2.51.0-rc2](https://lore.kernel.org/git/xmqqh5ybcfwt.fsf@gitster.g/),
[2.51.0-rc1](https://lore.kernel.org/git/xmqqikizoybn.fsf@gitster.g/),
[2.51.0-rc0](https://lore.kernel.org/git/xmqqms8f5889.fsf@gitster.g/)
+ Git for Windows [v2.51.0(1)](https://github.com/git-for-windows/git/releases/tag/v2.51.0.windows.1),
[v2.51.0-rc2(1)](https://github.com/git-for-windows/git/releases/tag/v2.51.0-rc2.windows.1),
[v2.51.0-rc1(1)](https://github.com/git-for-windows/git/releases/tag/v2.51.0-rc1.windows.1),
[v2.51.0-rc0(1)](https://github.com/git-for-windows/git/releases/tag/v2.51.0-rc0.windows.1)
+ GitLab [18.3.1, 18.2.5, 18.1.5](https://about.gitlab.com/releases/2025/08/27/patch-release-gitlab-18-3-1-released/),
[18.3](https://about.gitlab.com/releases/2025/08/21/gitlab-18-3-released/),
[18.2.4](https://about.gitlab.com/releases/2025/08/18/gitlab-18-2-4-released/),
[17.11.7](https://about.gitlab.com/releases/2025/08/15/gitlab-17-11-7-released/),
[18.2.2, 18.1.4, 18.0.6](https://about.gitlab.com/releases/2025/08/13/patch-release-gitlab-18-2-2-released/)
+ Gerrit Code Review [3.10.8](https://www.gerritcodereview.com/3.10.html#3108),
[3.11.5](https://www.gerritcodereview.com/3.11.html#3115),
[3.12.2](https://www.gerritcodereview.com/3.12.html#3122)
+ GitHub Enterprise [3.17.5](https://docs.github.com/enterprise-server@3.17/admin/release-notes#3.17.5),
[3.16.8](https://docs.github.com/enterprise-server@3.16/admin/release-notes#3.16.8),
[3.15.12](https://docs.github.com/enterprise-server@3.15/admin/release-notes#3.15.12),
[3.14.17](https://docs.github.com/enterprise-server@3.14/admin/release-notes#3.14.17)
+ GitKraken [11.3.0](https://help.gitkraken.com/gitkraken-client/current/)
+ Git Cola [4.14.0](https://github.com/git-cola/git-cola/releases/tag/v4.14.0)
+ GitButler [0.15.16](https://github.com/gitbutlerapp/gitbutler/releases/tag/release/0.15.16),
[0.15.15](https://github.com/gitbutlerapp/gitbutler/releases/tag/release/0.15.15)
+ Sublime Merge [Build 2112](https://www.sublimemerge.com/download)
+ Tower for Mac [14](https://www.git-tower.com/blog/tower-mac-14) ([YouTube video](https://youtu.be/WYhtxBAzOB0))
+ Kinetic Merge [1.9.0](https://github.com/sageserpent-open/kineticMerge/releases/tag/v1.9.0)

## Credits

This edition of Git Rev News was curated by
Christian Couder &lt;<christian.couder@gmail.com>&gt;,
Jakub Narębski &lt;<jnareb@gmail.com>&gt;,
Markus Jansen &lt;<mja@jansen-preisler.de>&gt; and
Kaartic Sivaraam &lt;<kaartic.sivaraam@gmail.com>&gt;
with help from Štěpán Němec, Gerard Murphy,
Seyi Kuforiji and Bruno Brito.
